Docs: SAML UI docs (#65847)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/setup-grafana/configure-security/configure-authentication/saml-ui/index.md

---
description: Learn how to configure SAML authentication in Grafana's UI.

> menuTitle: Configure SAML authentication in UI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
menuTitle: Configure SAML using the UI
```

> title: Configure SAML authentication in Grafana's UI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Configure SAML authentication using the Grafana user interface
```

weight: 1150
---

> # Configure SAML authentication in Grafana

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Configure SAML authentication using the Grafana user interface
```

Reviewer: Title in the front matter and the H1 need to match. We can go longer with that title and use menutitle to control how the topic title appears in the TOC.

> **Note:** Available in [Grafana Enterprise]({{< relref "../../../introduction/grafana-enterprise/" >}}) version 10.0 and later, and [Grafana Cloud Pro and Advanced](/docs/grafana-cloud/).

You can configure SAML authentication in Grafana through the user interface (UI) or the Grafana configuration file. For instructions on how to set up SAML using the Grafana configuration file, refer to [Configure SAML authentication in Grafana]({{< relref "../saml/" >}}).

The Grafana SAML UI provides the following advantages over configuring SAML in the Grafana configuration file:

- It is accessible by hosted Grafana users
- It doesn't require Grafana to be restarted after a configuration update
- Access to the SAML UI only requires access to authentication settings, so it can be used by users with limited access to Grafana's configuration

> **Note:** Configuration in the UI takes precedence over the configuration in the Grafana configuration file. SAML settings from the UI will override any SAML configuration set in the Grafana configuration file.

> # Before you begin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Before you begin
```

To follow this guide, you need:

- Knowledge of SAML authentication. Refer to [SAML authentication in Grafana]({{< relref "../saml/" >}}) for an overview of Grafana's SAML integration.
- Permissions that allow you to read and update authentication settings. These permissions are granted by `fixed:authentication.config:writer` role.
  By default, this role is granted to Grafana server administrator in self-hosted instances and to Organization admins in hosted Grafana instances.

> # Configure SAML

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Steps
```

Reviewer: I'm remember what we should do here. for topics that have just a single task (so one set of steps with one outcome), we use Steps here and then you add a simple intro like this: "To configure SAML using the Grafana UI, complete the following steps:"

And that's it. no need for any of the other navigation oriented content that you have. That stuff will be make its way into the steps.

You can save your SAML configuration, see SAML integration status and enable or disable SAML authentication on the top right-hand side.
If your SAML configuration is not valid or is incomplete, you will be notified about it when saving the configuration.

> SAML configuration is split across several pages. You can navigate between them by clicking on page titles on top of the screen or arrows on the bottom of the screen.

Reviewer: You don't need this. It's reinforced by the UI.

1. Sign in to Grafana and navigate to **Administration > Authentication > SAML**.

> 2. Click **General settings** and complete the section. Consult the following table for additional guidance about certain fields:

Reviewer: Use `1.` for all steps. They render in the proper order upon publication.

> | Field               | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |

Reviewer: Whatcha think? I think this work pretty well cause we're not telling them stuff that's obvious, yet providing helpful information if they do have a question. I would go ahead and add other tabs and use the same approach.

---
description: Learn how to configure SAML authentication in Grafana's UI.
menuTitle: Configure SAML authentication in UI
title: Configure SAML authentication in Grafana's UI
weight: 1150
---

# Configure SAML authentication in Grafana

> **Note:** Available in [Grafana Enterprise]({{< relref "../../../introduction/grafana-enterprise/" >}}) version 10.0 and later, and [Grafana Cloud Pro and Advanced](/docs/grafana-cloud/).

> You can configure SAML authentication in Grafana either through the UI or the Grafana config file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can configure SAML authentication in Grafana through the user interface (UI) or the Grafana configuration file.
```

Reviewer: Pls correct the path if I have that incorrect, and the name of the topic SAML config topic if you have changed that.

> Grafana SAML UI has the following advantages over configuring SAML in the Grafana config file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Grafana SAML UI provides the following advantages over configuring SAML in the Grafana configuration file:
```

> - It is accessible by hosted Grafana users;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It is accessible by hosted Grafana users
```

> - It doesn't require Grafana to be restarted after a configuration update;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It doesn't require Grafana to be restarted after a configuration update
```

> - Access to SAML UI only requires access to SAML settings, so it can be used by users with limited access to Grafana's configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Access to the SAML UI only requires access to SAML settings, so it can be used by users with limited access to Grafana's configuration.
```

> Configuration in the UI takes precedence over configuration in the Grafana config file.

Reviewer: Oh, this sounds important. Is it? Does this mean that SAML UI overwrites any changes I make to the config file? I think we should at least call this out in a `> **Note:**`

> Learn more about [SAML authentication in Grafana and how to set it up through the Grafana config file]({{< relref "../saml/" >}}).

Reviewer: ah, here's the link I was looking for earlier. I'd go ahead and use my suggestion to provide this link earlier in the doc and remove it from here.

> 

Reviewer: Nice intro. Then what we'll want to add is a Before you begin section that explains any prereqs the user should have in place before they start this task. Like so:

## Before you begin

To follow this guide, you need:

- Knowledge of SAML authentication
- Grafana permissions that allow you to xxx
- Anything else that we'd like users to have

Author: I've taken a stab at it, let me know what you think!

Reviewer: yep, that looks really good.

> # SAML UI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Configure SAML
```

> SAML UI is located under **Authentication > Authentication > SAML**.

Author: This is the location with the new navigation. If I understand correctly, new nav will be the default for Grafana 10, so I'm not including the location for the old nav.

You can save your SAML configuration, see SAML integration status and enable or disable SAML authentication on the top right-hand side.

> If your SAML configuration is not valid or is incomplete, you will be notified about it when saving the configuration.

Reviewer: This seems like detailed information that belongs nested within the steps.

Author: I'm not sure about this one - the idea is that you can save the configuration at any point, so I don't really know where to list it in the steps (after each section? or only after the final section?)

Reviewer: reading you comment again and realizing you're asking if we should have a Save step after the user has completed each tab.

I guess that depends on how likely it might be for the user to lose their information by mistake. So for example, if I complete the first tab and then click somewhere random (like trying to navigate to dashboards or something), am I prompted to Save? If not, then we might think about adding more frequent Save steps.

Author: I think currently you're not prompted to save, and it also doesn't autosave, so we should probably add the `save` step a few times. But I'll double check with Alex if this is the case.

SAML configuration is split across several pages. You can navigate between them by clicking on page titles on top of the screen or arrows on the bottom of the screen.

## Access requirements

To access SAML UI, user needs `fixed:authentication.config:writer` role.
By default, this role is granted to Grafana server administrator in self-hosted instances and to Organization admins in hosted Grafana instances.

## Updating the general settings

> Under `General settings` page you can update the following settings:

Reviewer: Will it be obvious to users what they need to enter in General settings? If not, then we need to include guidance in this document and not send them to the other SAML doc. A lot of back and forth is an unpleasant user experience.

Reviewer: And we should format the content as steps, something like:

1. Sign in to Grafana and click **Authentication > Authentication > SAML**.
2. Click **General settings** and complete the following fields:

Then add a table with a field name column and description column and add content to it.

OR...consider using the following approach if the user generally knows what to enter on the General settings tab and you want to call out some areas where they might need a little more information but yet don't want to list every single field.

2. Click  **General settings** and complete the fields:

   Consult the following table for additional guidance about certain fields:
   
   Add a table with field name and guidance column.

> **Note:** Configuration in the UI takes precedence over the configuration in the Grafana configuration file. SAML settings from the UI will override any SAML configuration set in the Grafana configuration file.

## Before you begin

To follow this guide, you need:

- Knowledge of SAML authentication. Refer to [SAML authentication in Grafana]({{< relref "../saml/" >}}) for an overview of Grafana's SAML integration.
- Permissions that allow you to read and update authentication settings. These permissions are granted by `fixed:authentication.config:writer` role.
  By default, this role is granted to Grafana server administrator in self-hosted instances and to Organization admins in hosted Grafana instances.
- Grafana instance running Grafana version 10.0 or later with [Grafana Enterprise]({{< relref "../../../introduction/grafana-enterprise/" >}}) or [Grafana Cloud Pro or Advanced](/docs/grafana-cloud/) license.

## Steps

Follow these steps to configure and enable SAML integration:

1. Sign in to Grafana and navigate to **Administration > Authentication > Configure SAML**.

> 1. Complete the **General settings** section. Consult the following table for additional guidance about certain fields:

Reviewer: reason: numbered steps should be a clear directive communicated in one sentence. You can additional information about the step below it.

| Field               | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | signup              | Determines whether to allow new Grafana user creation through SAML login. If disabled, then only existing Grafana users can log in with SAML.                                                                                                           |

Reviewer: I'm not sure what the Determines sentence means. I wonder if we can simply say "If enabled, you can create users through the SAML login"?

> | signup              | Determines whether to allow new Grafana user creation through SAML login. If disabled, then only existing Grafana users can log in with SAML.                                                                                                           |

Author: Yup, that sounds better 👍

> | single logout       | SAML's single logout feature allows users to log out from all applications associated with the current IdP session established via SAML SSO. Consult [SAML single logout documentation]]({{< relref "../saml/#single-logout" >}}) for more information. |

Reviewer: In tech docs, we favor "enable" instead of "allow" because "allow" connotes that the user has abstract permission (like from their manager) to perform the action.

> | IdP initiated login | Allows users to log into Grafana directly from the SAML identity provider (IdP). Consult [IdP initiated login documentation]({{< relref "../saml/#idp-initiated-single-sign-on-sso" >}}) for more information.                                          |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| IdP initiated login | Enables users to log in to Grafana from the SAML IdP. For more information, refer to [IdP initiated login documentation]({{< relref "../saml/#idp-initiated-single-sign-on-sso" >}}).                                          |
```

Reviewer: You've used IdP earlier in the document without defining it. Is this an acronym that is widely understood by the audience? If so, I don't think it's necessary to define it as "identify provider (IdP)" - and you can just go with "IdP" throughout.

Author: That's a good point. I think it's a well known acronym, so you're right that we can skip the definition.

> 1. Click **Next: Key and certificate**.

Reviewer: Is this the name of a tab?

Author: It's the name of the button.

<img width="227" alt="Screenshot 2023-04-12 at 10 05 52" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/9482349/231378682-8204891f-dac7-4edb-9270-7fc729a54bb6.png">

Reviewer 2: We could add missing `Auto login` option here.

> 1. Provide a certificate and a private key that will be used by the service provider (Grafana) and the SAML identity provider. The private key needs to be issued in the [PKCS #8](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PKCS_8) format. You can refer to our SAML documentation for [an example on how to generate SAML credentials]({{< relref "../saml/#example-of-how-to-generate-saml-credentials" >}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Provide a certificate and a private key that will be used by the service provider (Grafana) and the SAML IdP. 

   Use the [PKCS #8](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PKCS_8) format to issue the private key.
   
   For more information, refer to [an example on how to generate SAML credentials]({{< relref "../saml/#example-of-how-to-generate-saml-credentials" >}}).
```

Reviewer: The link text ideally should be the actual name of the topic you are sending them to.

> 1. Specify whether you want the outgoing requests to be signed, and, if so, which signature algorithm should be used.

Reviewer: is this a field? If so, we should name it like "In the xxx field, specify..."

> 1. Click **Next: Connect Grafana with Identity Provider** and complete the section.

Reviewer: I wonder if I can see the UI. I'm curious about this flow and the UI labels.

Author: Sure! We can click through the UI once you're back from the break to see how it looks like.

Reviewer 2: Should we mention that signing requests is recommended since without it you're vulnerable to MITM attack?

1. Click **Next: User mapping**. If you wish to [map user information from SAML assertions]({{< relref "../saml/#assertion-mapping" >}}), complete this section. This section also allows you to set up SAML [team synchronization]({{< relref "../saml/#configure-team-sync" >}}), [role synchronization]({{< relref "../saml/#configure-role-sync" >}}) and [organization mapping]({{< relref "../saml/#configure-organization-mapping" >}}).

> 1. Click **Next: Test and enable** and then click **Save and enable**.

Reviewer: I would separate the test and enable from the Save. So something like:

1. Click **Next: Test and enable**.
    
    If there are issues...

1. Click Save and enable.

   Your SAML integration is now configured.

Author: Configuration errors are only highlighted once the user has tried to save the configuration. But we can talk through this once we look at the UI together.

   1. If there are issues with your configuration, an error message will appear. Refer back to the previous steps to correct the issues and click on `Save and apply` on the top right corner once you are done.

> 1. If there are no configuration issues, SAML integration status will change to `Enabled`. Congratulations! You nave successfully configured your SAML integration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If there are no configuration issues, SAML integration status will change to `Enabled`. 

   Your SAML configuration is now enabled.
```

> 1. If you wish to disable SAML integration, click on `Disable` on the top right corner. SAML integration status will change to `Saved, not enabled`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. To disable SAML integration, click `Disable` in the top right corner.
```

---
description: Learn how to configure SAML authentication in Grafana's UI.
menuTitle: Configure SAML using the UI
title: Configure SAML authentication using the Grafana user interface
weight: 1150
---

# Configure SAML authentication using the Grafana user interface

> **Note:** Available in [Grafana Enterprise]({{< relref "../../../introduction/grafana-enterprise/" >}}) version 10.0 and later, and [Grafana Cloud Pro and Advanced](/docs/grafana-cloud/).

You can configure SAML authentication in Grafana through the user interface (UI) or the Grafana configuration file. For instructions on how to set up SAML using the Grafana configuration file, refer to [Configure SAML authentication using the configuration file]({{< relref "../saml/" >}}).

> The Grafana SAML UI provides the following advantages over configuring SAML in the Grafana configuration file:

Reviewer 3: Should we mention as an advantage that by using UI users will get basic validation and feedback about their setup, to ensure the correctness of the config?

Author: Good shout, I've added a bulletpoint for it. Let me know what you think.

- It is accessible by hosted Grafana users
- It doesn't require Grafana to be restarted after a configuration update

> - Access to the SAML UI only requires access to authentication settings, so it can be used by users with limited access to Grafana's configuration

Reviewer 3: By authentication settings do we refer to the new page? Since this is a new item in the menu, I am wondering if it would make sense to have additional docs update in [Configure authentication](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/configure-security/configure-authentication/) to refer to the new admin page (which would include only SAML at the moment).

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should mention that it's required RBAC configuration to grant access to non Grafana Admins?

> **Note:** Configuration in the UI takes precedence over the configuration in the Grafana configuration file. SAML settings from the UI will override any SAML configuration set in the Grafana configuration file.

## Before you begin

To follow this guide, you need:

- Knowledge of SAML authentication. Refer to [SAML authentication in Grafana]({{< relref "../saml/" >}}) for an overview of Grafana's SAML integration.

> - Permissions that allow you to read and update authentication settings. These permissions are granted by `fixed:authentication.config:writer` role.

Reviewer 3: I could not find this role in the [definitions](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/next/administration/roles-and-permissions/access-control/rbac-fixed-basic-role-definitions/). Should we add this in scope of this PR, or separate? Also what do you think about mentioning the permission ID itself, next to the role?

Author: I raised a separate small PR for it: https://github.com/grafana/grafana/pull/66957
